Hello Everyone! This is Stjepan and welcome to Hanging Pawns! In today’s video I’m going to go over the basics of the Ruy Lopez or the Spanish Game, which is one of the strongest weapons you could add to your opening repertoire. And while most other openings come and go, drop in popularity, and then make a comeback when a novelty is discovered, the Ruy Lopez or the Spanish Game is the best and most solid choice for 1.e4 players, from beginner to super GM level, and that will never change because the idea of the opening follows the best opening rules and principles, and it just can’t grow old. I’m going to go over the main variations briefly in this video, but each one will be covered in detail in an individual video. The opening starts after 1.e4 by white, challenging the center and attacking the f5 and the d5 squares. Black replies with 1…e5, stopping white’s main plan, which is to push his queen’s pawn from d2 to d4, which would create a formidable center and give white an advantage. White now replies with the second move 2.Nf3, which is challenging the e5 pawn, attacking the e5 pawn, and supporting d4 once again, so simply continuing to push his idea of creating a strong center, and black one again has to stop that with the most logical move, Nc6. Once again stopping the d4 push and defending the e5 pawn. And white now puts more pressure on both squares indirectly, by challenging the c6 knight. He plays Bb5. And this is now the Ruy Lopez. This move is attacking the defender of e5 and d4, so it’s indirectly forcing the d4 push and the capture of e5, and this is now the starting position of the opening. All the moves make perfect sense, but it’s important to understand what the idea behind each move is in order to be able to follow the variations. From this move on the opening branches out into three main variations; the main lines which lead either to the closed or the open Ruy Lopez, the Berlin Defense, which starts after 3…Nf6, and the exchange variation. And black is the one who chooses now, and he has two main moves here. The first one is 3…a6, and it’s by far the most common one. This move is challenging the b5 bishop immediately, and the bishop only has two options in this position. Retreating back to either c4, d3 or e2 would be a waste of tempo because wouldn’t keep the pressure on the c6 knight, so the most common idea is to go back to a4, which is still putting pressure on the c6 knight. That’s the starting position of most lines in the Ruy Lopez. Another way white could react to 3…a6 is by simply taking on c6, without retreating, so Bxc6, and this is the easiest variation to learn I would say. This is the Exchange Variation of the Ruy Lopez. In this position white is simply saying: “Ok, I’m going to put pressure on e5 by removing the defender, simply removing the defender.” And after 4…dxc6, one common idea of this opening is that white is counting on his “pawn majority” on the kingside, which is far superior to black’s “pawn majority” on the queenside. He just has four against four on the kingside as opposed to black’s “three” to four on the queenside. Black will be unable to force his pawns forward and white will be able to perhaps even create a passed pawn after some central pawns get exchanged. This means that in any endgame white will have an advantage. Despite an equal number of pawns, white has a better pawn structure. In this position, of course, white can’t take the e5 pawn, which, perhaps you might have thought was possible after he took the knight on c6. If he takes, then black is able to simply respond with Qd4, and this is one of the most common opening traps in the Ruy Lopez. And after the knight retreats, the queen simply takes and black will have equal material with a better position. After the exchange happens, white has forfeited castling rights and black stands a little bit better. But after 4…dxc6, the position is still very complex. There are a lot of lines in the Exchange Variation of the Ruy Lopez and I will be covering them in a separate video. But this is the second way to react, so after a6, white either takes the knight or plays Ba4. Ba4 is the most common move and after this black has a few ways to continue playing, but by far the most common one, and how 99% of games are played, is with black continuing with Nf6, simply putting pressure on e4. White castles. The pawn on e4 can’t be taken because white would be able to play Re1 and pressurize both the e4 knight and the e5 pawn, so black continues with Be7, and after Re1 this is the Closed Ruy Lopez. And, once again, 99% of games continue with 6…b5, the bishop retreating to b3, castles, c3 and d6. And this position now is , I would say, the starting position of the closed Ruy Lopez, and this position can be seen in probably 20% of grandmaster games which start with 1.e4 e5. And this position, the Closed Ruy Lopez is, with the Berlin Defense and the Marshall Attack, the third most common line after 1.e4 e5. White, I this position, has one more move which simply has to be played. That’s h3. And after h3, white has completed the first plan of his plan, and he is now letting black choose how to continue the game. The arrows here are indicating the most common plans for both sides. First of all, white’s main plan in this position, and from the start of the opening, from 1.e4, 2.Nf3 and 3.Bb5, the point of each of those moves until now was to push the d pawn forward and to create a strong center with d4. That was the purpose of the move c3, that was the purpose of every move so far. To push the d4 pawn. Black is, in a way, trying to stop that, but, he also has plans of his own. The second plan by white is to transfer the undeveloped b1 knight to the g3 square. And this is one of the most common maneuvers in chess, and almost every Closed Ruy Lopez game sees that maneuver happen. The point is to transfer the knight to d2, to f1 and then to g3, and from this point on white is able to start an attack. And black, on the other hand, has a few plans of his own. Firstly, he might try to get the knight out of the way for the f pawn to move, which is black’s pawn break in the position. Another idea is to push the c pawn, but for that to happen the c6 knight has to move. It will either go to a5 or to b8, or perhaps even waste a few more tempi to maneuver and to let black be able to play c5, or c6 in some positions. Black is also attempting to play d5 in some positions, and to break in the center himself. But, from this position, the black side has to choose how to continue. There are two main variations from this position. The first one is 9…Nb8, which is the Breyer Variation of the Closed Ruy Lopez. The point of this variation is that black is trying to re maneuver his knight to a much more useful square, which is d7. From d7 it’s making room for the c pawn to move and to break in the center, and it’s also defending the e5 pawn which is making the main push for black, d5, a real possibility. From this position white is able to continue in several ways, black as well. I will cover the variation in a separate video too. After 9.h3, the second most common variation black could go for is the Chigorin Variation, which starts with 9…Na5. The point of Na5 is that black is gaining a tempo on the b3 bishop, which has to retreat to c2. Which is why white played c3 in the first place, along with pushing the d4 pawn, the point was to give a retreat square to the bishop. After the bishop retreats in this position, black plays c5. And that’s the point. He got to play c5 with tempo, and he got to re maneuver his knight back into the game with tempo. I will just give a nothing move for white just to show the point of that; black is now able to put the knight back into the center, on c6. And, if you noticed, the pawn is no longer on c7, it’s now on c5, and black has definitely gotten something out of the position, and he made the white bishop retreat as well. These are the two main variations from the Closed Ruy Lopez. But this is the position you have to remember, because many games, and almost all the games in the Closed Ruy Lopez will look like this. If you were watching the Candidates Tournament, which just finished two days ago, there were, I think, seven or eight games which started from this position. The players would get to this point playing “a tempo”, wasting absolutely no time, and then they’d start thinking. The other variation which doesn’t go into the closed lines, after 3.Bb5, the other most useful variation to know is the Berlin Defense. I’m sure you heard about it as the variation gained so much in popularity in recent years, that it’s becoming one of the strongest weapons for black, especially when he is trying to draw a stronger opponent. The variation is so well analyzed and so well known that it’s very hard to surprise your opponent even at lower levels. And you absolutely have to know it if you play 1.e4, or if you play e5 in response to 1.e4, because if you don’t know the theory, the chances are that you are just going to lose. The Berlin Defense doesn’t start with 3…a6, which is the most common move in the Ruy Lopez, but black plays 3…Nf6 instead. This is now the Berlin Defense. Once again, this variation has a few lines white and black could choose, and I will show them in a separate video when I will do the detailed analysis of the Berlin Defense. But the most common line, the so called “Berlin Endgame”, goes like this: white castles in this position, Nxe4, d4, Nd6, attacking the bishop, bishop takes c6, dxc6, dxe5 chasing the knight away. And after the knight goes to f5, the queens get exchanged. And this is the starting position of the Berlin Defense. This position was introduced to high level chess by Vladimir Kramnik in his 2000. World Championship match against Garry Kasparov, in which he actually managed to defeat Garry Kasparov using the Berlin as a surprise weapon. After the match, when Kramnik won, people just realized that if Kasparov could lose to this, then it must be really strong despite looking kind of weird for black, and it seems that white has a big advantage. The point of this position is, even though black has forfeited castling rights, he has the bishop pair. He has the possibility of creating a stronger attack in the middlegame, and if he manages to get something from the initiative he is able to create, he will be better. In exchange for that, white has a much better pawn structure and, of course, castling rights. So, the point of the position, and there were recent games, for example Maxime Vachier-Lagrave played a game with 20-30 moves of theory, in which every move was analyzed to perfection, and the point is that white is trying to create a passed pawn on the kingside. And all of these pawns are free to move and he has a four to three pawn majority on the kingside, so white is realistically able to create a passed pawn. While black, on the other hand, has a pawn majority on the queenside, but if you notice the c pawns are doubled, so there isn’t really a chance for him to create a passed pawn. In theory, any piece exchange favors white, because with less pieces on the board, the pawns become more important. If you imagined all the pieces being off the board, white would be clearly winning, because he’d be able to create a passed pawn. And, therefore, black has to create something with his bishop pair and he has to gain some initiative before exchanges happen. The opening is so well analyzed and there are so many lines, that I can’t even begin explaining them now. I will go into much more detail in a separate video on the Berlin. Ok, I would like to go over a few more variations of the Ruy Lopez which are worth knowing. In the main position after 4.Ba4, bishop retreating, going for the Closed Ruy Lopez lines, 4…Nf6 and castles, instead of Be7, going for the Closed Ruy Lopez, black is able to play two more variations which are really strong and much more offensive to white than the closed lines. The first one is the Archangel Variation which starts with 5…b5. Immediately pushing the white bishop away to b3, and black now develops with Bb7. And this position is trying to catch white off guard, one could say, and to gain quick development for black. And if you noticed, the black king is still in the center, bishop from f8 hasn’t moved yet, but black is creating a lot of pressure on the e4 pawn with the bishop on b7, and he is starting to create an attack early on, as opposed to getting into the closed lines, which, after this position, look a bit more passive for black, and they are actually giving white a free hand in the center and letting him push the d4 pawn in exchange for something else for black. After castles, the Archangel Variation is 5…b5, and another variation black could go for is 5…Nxe4, and this is the so called Open Ruy Lopez. Same as the Archangel variation, the Open Ruy Lopez gives a lot more attacking chances for black, but it also means that white is able to attack much sooner because the black king is still in the center. One more very important variation, after castles, black is going for Be7, main Closed Ruy Lopez lines, Re1, b5, Bb3, castles and c3, from this position, black doesn’t have to play d6, which is going for the Breyer, the Chigorin, the Karpov variation, and so on. Black is able to play a much more aggressive move, d5, striking in the center immediately. This is called the Marshall Attack. And, in recent years, this has become the most aggressive weapon black has against the Ruy Lopez, but sadly it’s been considered a drawing weapon, as some lines are analyzed up to 30 or 40 moves deep, and they have been calculated up to a forced draw, however, the position creates a lot of imbalances and gives attacking chances to both sides. The point of the variation is that black is sacrificing a pawn for the initiative. The main line and the only line that’s played after d5 is exd5, knight takes d5, and now white is able to go a pawn up and take a central pawn by playing knight takes e5, knight takes e5, and rook takes e5. And in this position, if you noticed, white has seven pawns, black has six pawns, but the attacking chances for black are much better and black is able to create a lot of initiative in just a few moves. He has to defend the knight first with c6, d4, and now bishop to d6. And in this position you can see what black sacrificed the pawn for. If you noticed, whites queenside pieces; the rook, the knight, the bishop and the queen are still completely undeveloped, stuck on their original squares, and black is starting to create a menacing attack using his bishop pair and the queen. If you imagined the queen coming to h4, which is actually what happens in most Marshall Attack games, then black has a lot of compensation, and even more than enough for the pawn he sacrificed. And in most games white is actually forced to give material back just to be able to survive. But, as I said, the variation is so well analyzed that now, on top level, it usually ends in a draw. Ok, so just to recap; the Ruy Lopez, after 3.Bb5, is one of the most common openings in chess, and it’s actually the most solid opening and it’s considered that you can’t become a good player unless you know it perfectly. That’s partly true, because in the Ruy Lopez, the better player wins. That’s the common rule and there aren’t any surprises, attacking gambits, there are no sacrifices, it’s just that you have to know how to play positional chess, you have to know how to re maneuver your pieces, you have to understand squares, weakness of squares, you have to understand outposts. And only a player who is well versed in chess principles and opening principles is able to understand the Ruy Lopez. That’s why studying this opening will develop each part of your chess skill and I think it’s absolutely essential. All the variations which I have shown now; the Berlin Defense, the Exchange Variation, the variations in the Closed and the Open Ruy Lopez, will be covered in a separate video, one video for each, and I will go into a lot more detail on each variation with sample games and much more information on each one. Ok, everyone! I hope you liked this video on the chess opening Ruy Lopez or the Spanish Game, and see you soon with more chess videos.